# Data Tactic

The pillar of the data tactic are the **Events** and the **data distribution**. The core principle is _full data ownership on the producer_. All policies are applied on the producer side and the data platform main responsibility is guaranteed data persistence, order and immutability and make it avaliable and usable (including compliance).

The pivot that join events and data distribution is **DATA IMMUTABILITY**. Our tactic is guaranteed that the data generated by the producer is not mutate by other actors. New data can be generated, but the original must be referenced. At the same time, the new data is also immutable and the new actors its producer.

The immutability force data to be mutated and compliant on the producer allowing securely work on **Big Data Scale**

> When Events is named, is not limited to events, is also considered behaviors through stream concept.

## 1. Define event standard and semantic (**Behavioral Data**)

Predictability on data format its important to be able to process and automate. The tactic categorize the data standard on 3 aspects:

- Payload: Describe how the event data is enveloped and distributed.
- Semantic: Describe how an event is semantically constructed
- Baggage: The event should contain only the data difference, but sometimes is useful provide the entity state. To separate

The separation is important. The tactic must support and be compatible with legacy data, no standardized data or third party data. Under this tactic, the Payload is just standard data/meta-data container that do not restrict the data format/content.

> Only data Payload is mandatory for everything and Data Semantic is mandatory for new data.

Technology: [CloudEvents](https://cloudevents.io/) is a good candidate.


### Payload

The payload is the envelope that describe the data contained:

- Owner
- Sign
- Reference Link (for data copied) *
- Time
- Format
- Domain
- Zone
- Data (Message)
- Baggage **

* **_Only de producer can mutate and write its data. If another artifact needs send not owned data, must sent the reference. The data owner will be validate using the sign_**

** **_The baggage are adittional READ ONLY data that is useful for performance reason. For example, entity full state_**

The semantic is optional for legacy and external data and mandatory for new data. The semantic is defined by an **event context grammar**.

_"Simply put, event context describes the environment and manner in which an event took place. There are strong parallels between our view of event context and the adverbial concept of “time, manner, place” used in human language to describe events. Context is used to describe, among other things:_

- _Where an event took place – where in the physical world, or in which digital environment_
- _When an event took place – either in absolute terms or relative to other events_
- _How an event took place – in what manner did an event take place"_ - [snowplowanalytics](https://snowplowanalytics.com/blog/2014/03/11/building-an-event-grammar-understanding-context/)

The valid event grammar is defined by:

Subject(Id) -> VERB -> Direct Object(Id) -> Indirect Object(Id) -> Prep. Object

Examples:

- Shopper 12345 view a product 6789
- Shopper 1245 adds a t-shirt sku1234678 to basket 43573 on web page 456782

## 2. Define Domains and Zones

## 3. Define protected zone

### Data Quality

### Data Classification

### Data anonymization

### Access Auditory

### Access Control

## 4. Implement **immutability**  guarantee from producer (real immutability) (JWT)

## 5. Implement protected zone data lake

## 6. Implement event bus

## 7. Implement domains and zone data lake

## 8. Implement data flow (real cases)

## 9. Implement data sandboxes and experimentation tools

## 10. Implement data views and exploitation tools
